<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act I: Their First Life Together</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-1" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">I</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Their First Life Together</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Time⁠—2000 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>, Egypt</p>
			</header>
			<div epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
				<header>
					<p>Characters</p>
				</header>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>Menophis, a young Egyptian, well born, about 30.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Nefertiti, an Egyptian dancing-girl.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Sethos, Egyptian youth.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Rames, High Priest in Temple of Aton.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			<p>Scene⁠—Banks of the Nile. White temple visible in distance. Kephren’s Pyramid seen very far away.</p>
			<p>Late evening, sunset.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b> enter and pause.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Now leave me, Sethos. And go swiftly. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With gesture of pushing him off.</i> I must be alone. You follow me as wind follows a bird.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>Yet never touch you as wind does the bird. And when you dance your feet dance on my heart. No other dancing-girl compares with you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Last moon Pharaoh himself told me that. I know it. But now leave me. I am here to worship.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Supplicating.</i> May I not stay a moment⁠—at least, until Menophis⁠—?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Sethos, you heard me. It is the sacred night. The Tear of Isis falls into our River when the dusk has passed to darkness. And I must worship.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>Menophis comes also with the dusk. You meet here every evening; and when he comes I am forgotten. May I not stay and be remembered⁠—till he comes? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Implores.</i> Your beauty makes me slavish. Out of his plenty he will not miss so little, and I⁠—starve.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Not now. Sethos, I tell you, go! His coming, as you know, makes the dry desert live for me. I would not have him troubled for so little. He hardly is aware of your existence⁠—as yet. But, should I ever need you⁠—slave⁠—!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Eagerly.</i> As yet! Need me! Oh, Nefertiti, if you could use me I should die of happiness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Then prepare to die, for the time <em>may</em> come.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>Oh, may it happen soon!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Teasing.</i> The Gods alone know what may happen, and when. You are my slave. Then, vanish!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Bowing.</i> Your slave obeys. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising.</i> But your lover will wait among the palm-trees yonder. Menophis may not come. The Gods know what will happen, and it is said the Gods have claimed him for themselves. He is a prize, it seems, that earth and heaven both desire. I have heard rumours. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Moves off lingeringly.</i> If you need escort back to Memphis your lightest call will reach me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Go! I shall not need your escort. My happiness and his are in the keeping of the Gods. Leave me to worship.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With boy’s passion.</i> Oh, Nefertiti, the wild sweetness of the desert is in your breath! To me you are holy as our sacred River! May the Gods grant you all your heart’s desire. Sethos is your slave forever⁠—even though his heart should break.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit, slowly, looking back.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="3" epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Smiling to herself.</i> A slave is always useful⁠—for slavish purposes. I may put you to the test someday!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She watches him out of sight behind the palms, then goes to the water’s edge and splashes idly with her bare foot several times in succession, accompanying each splash with a remark.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>He’ll bury himself in the Temple.⁠ ⁠… He’ll bury himself in my arms.⁠ ⁠… He’ll become a monk at Rames’ bidding.⁠ ⁠… He’ll become mine. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Makes biggest splash of all.</i> I’ve got him⁠ ⁠… under this very foot! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Hears his footstep.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Entering.</i> You here! Nefertiti! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She pretends not to hear. She is worshipping.</i> Nefertiti!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Startled.</i> Menophis!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>You worship here at dusk⁠ ⁠… beside the Nile!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>I often come at sunset⁠—as you know.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>I⁠ ⁠… had⁠ ⁠… forgotten.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Forgotten! Has some Afreet blinded you? Only last night, too, you passed me by without a glance⁠—on your way to Aton’s new Temple.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>It was moonless and I did not see you. No Afreet power could hide you in the sunshine.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Mocking.</i> Oh, thank you, Menophis. I thought your heart was too full perhaps to see me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>You have been worshipping alone⁠—and you were lonely. Forgive me, Little Child, I⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>I forgive you, O handsome Menophis. But I was not lonely. Sethos kept me company awhile.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Sethos! The Syrian banker’s son! You can find pleasure in such company?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Softly.</i> You did not come here to talk with me of Sethos. You came, like me, to worship⁠—!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>He is rich.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>He is forgotten too. When you call me “Little Child” the whole world is forgotten. There is only⁠—You.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Little⁠ ⁠… Child.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes closer.</i> Your eyes seem strange to me tonight: they look far away into space. Your voice sounds distant like the desert jackal’s cry. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She puts a hand on his and looks searchingly into his eyes.</i> Yet you call me Little Child, as of old, when we met here every evening in the dusk⁠ ⁠… to play and talk and dream together⁠ ⁠… of the future. Menophis <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">taking his other hand and drawing her body closer to him</i>, will you not tell me⁠—your Little Child⁠—this sacred night when the Tear of Isis bids our river rise⁠—tell me what wonderful new dream has crept into this faithful heart? <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Lowers her head as though to hear its beating.</i> I hear another music in your blood. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Lifts her face to his.</i> And it is⁠ ⁠… beautiful. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Waits for his reply.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>It is the Sacred Night. That means⁠—Had you forgotten?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarmed, but half teasing.</i> Oh, you Solemnity! Forgotten what?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gravely.</i> A choice⁠—a decision⁠—made tonight is made forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Low.</i> I know.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Little Child, it is for me a crisis, and I must choose between great issues. My life, too, is rising. I must decide in what direction it shall flow.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>You mean⁠ ⁠… with whom?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><em>For</em> whom.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He turns his head a moment towards the distant Temple of Aton, just visible still in the last sunset light. Its whiteness gleams. She notices the gesture.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>How cold it has grown. Menophis.⁠ ⁠… I feel the desert-wind’s fingers at my heart. It is the North wind from the sea. You, too, seem distant suddenly. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Lowering voice.</i> I fear for you. Why is it? I fear something⁠ ⁠… for myself⁠ ⁠… as well⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>There is no fear this sacred night. There is courage only. Life increases everywhere. The river rises. The Tear of Isis falls into the Nile and⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Hark! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">She listens.</i> There are awful things about in Egypt when⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>She is alive, that’s all.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Listen!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>It is the lapping waves. It is the wind among the palms.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Whispering.</i> The waters! That cold desert wind! It blows between us⁠—between you and me. There is a shadow! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shudders closer to him.</i> Surely great Kephren bowed this way!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>The stars shine over us. They cast no shadow. The pyramid stands fast.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Yet something passed between us, for I felt it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Grips him.</i> You are all <em>mine</em>?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Holds her close.</i> There is no room. A shadow cannot separate us. Anything <em>real</em> would bind us closer only.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Then why are you so solemn, your eyes so far away, your voice so distant? This crisis that you speak of⁠—it could not take you from <em>me</em>?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Nothing can take you from me, or me from you⁠—for long. The chain of our past and future lives is bound together beyond all breaking.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>What is it, then, that frightens me?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With grave tenderness.</i> Ah, Nefertiti, Little Child, tonight I stand⁠—<em>we</em> stand together⁠—at the very gates of life. The choice is difficult, for it involves you too. Since first, three years ago, I saw you flitting, like a swallow, down the river bank at Memphis⁠—since those enchanted days I have had no other human love but you⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Startled.</i> No other <em>human</em> love!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Slowly.</i> There <em>is</em> another love, my Nefertiti⁠—a greater; not more enduring, perhaps, but nobler. For it demands the greater sacrifice. And, cold though it seem to your warm, passionate heart⁠—<em>if</em> it should call me⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Catching him by the arm.</i> Greater! Yet would take you from me! But you <em>are</em> mine!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Your beauty troubles me; my blood rebels. I cannot look at you and hear the call this sacred night may bring me. I must make a still place for my soul to listen. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Slowly.</i> Oh, Nefertiti, you must leave me⁠—for a little.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Not knowing what is in your troubled heart! Not hearing from your own lips if we shall meet again!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sees <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</b> approaching.</i> You should know all. If not from my lips, then from⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sees <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</b> too.</i> Rames, the great Priest! I understand. He would steal you from me for his dismal Temple, steal you away from life.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>He is among the wisest and noblest of our land, the Great One of Vision, Aton’s servant.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pouting, alarmed.</i> Aton!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Hush! Be careful! Even if Aton takes me, the chain of lives <em>must</em> bring us again together. It were but a brief separation⁠—a sacrifice of pain and joy we both may offer as one being. And when, in our next life, we meet again, what ecstasy of strengthened, purified love would be ours⁠—to know each had been faithful to the other⁠—for His sake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Roused.</i> Me grow old in loneliness while you satisfy your soul with selfish worship! <em>Our</em> sacrifice!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>In dreams we still⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>We should never meet; a dream’s a dream. No children would come to me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>You would not pine. It would be, for both of us, a preparation for our meeting in a future life⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Playing on his feelings.</i> You are right, Menophis. I should not pine, for I should marry and know joy. Your sacrifice, if you choose it, you may bear alone, for Nefertiti will not certainly be lonely. There is no lack of those who offer life to her in place of the dream that Rames sets before you⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Others! Is there another? Nefertiti⁠—! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Approaches.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Withdraws.</i> Rames is coming. I hear his cautious step. Make your choice with him. I will not influence you. You wished to be alone; I’ll leave you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Makes to move away.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With passion and regret.</i> One moment more. Will you not say farewell? And if⁠—and if⁠—until you hear from my own lips⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Softly.</i> If you decide to leave me, Menophis, you will not quite forget⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Little Child, you know. Always I shall think of you⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Mocking.</i> As happy and lighthearted⁠—with another. I am no “dream” to Sethos.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Your beauty tortures me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>You do not torture <em>me</em>; you cannot. If you loved me you could not give me up so lightly. You may think of me⁠—of <em>us</em>⁠—walking along this river bank at sunset with laughter and without regret, talking maybe of Menophis, and his passing dream. The echo of our laughter may reach into your little cell.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Advancing.</i> Unsay those haunting words.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>It is but impulse that betrays you. You have a “greater love” than me. I have one too! Farewell. I shall not come again unless you call me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b> paces to and fro, hides his face in his hands, sighs, looks after the girl, pauses, then bows his head and waits while <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</b> comes up to him.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>Your eyes are troubled, although I cannot see them. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks down at the young man’s footsteps.</i> And your steps leave an uneven pattern on the sands.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking up.</i> There are too many voices in my ears; and all are sweet. I know not which is true. I am unhappy and afraid. My peace of yesterday is gone.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>These stars that watch you now shall watch your future lives as well. Before they pale at dawn they shall have marked your choice. They are rising in the east. They watch you⁠—and they wait.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turning his look away from the sky.</i> I came here to find peace⁠—between the sunset and the sunrise.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>Sunrise and sunset⁠—the two great moments of the day. Death and resurrection⁠—the two great moments of our life. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Watches him closely.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Not death⁠—a disappearance only <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">smiles</i> for a little time.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pleased.</i> To return again and again, each new life linked to those that went before; and each determined by opportunities left or taken.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>The choice! Oh, Rames, there are two calls in me. I hear two voices always. My future life hangs upon the decision that I make.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><em>You</em> will not make it. It will make itself. The stronger call must win <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">points across the Nile towards the sinking sun</i>. It is whether you shall live unto yourself alone, or consecrate your powers to Aton. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Points towards the Temple.</i> It is not alone your future life that hangs upon the choice; it is your future lives.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They spread their arms and bow towards the West. The sun sinks below the Libyan horizon of the desert. The dusk creeps up.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising.</i> If only the whole of me could choose. I should then know that I am worthy.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Approving.</i> There can be no half-heartedness in the service of our Deity.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With enthusiasm.</i> Our Deity⁠—the sun!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns and gazes at the great Temple of Aton whose white columns still gleam in the golden afterglow some distance across the desert.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Moving closer, with hand on his shoulder.</i> Egypt, our great land, now witnesses the climax of her splendour. A change, which is divine, steals over her. It is no longer the mere disc of the sun we worship; it is the power behind.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Reverently.</i> The heat and glory that are in Aton, eternal and all-loving Deity.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Smiling.</i> Who calls you for the offering of⁠—yourself. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pauses.</i> The Temples of our regenerated Egypt demand the best.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Eagerly.</i> And I might help towards this great uplifting?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gravely.</i> Menophis, Aton calls you to himself.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Enthusiasm and awe on his face.</i> I hear the call!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Slowly.</i> But other, lesser, calls as well?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>There can be no turning back!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>No turning back.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>I must be sure!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>It is forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Very low.</i> I know which call is highest, yet I hear that sweeter voice. If only I could smother it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Understanding.</i> It is the lust of life⁠—of woman!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>It is love.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">The dusk is turning into darkness. The stars begin to peep.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>I may not influence you. Years ago I heard these two calls, as you do, singing in my soul.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking eagerly, with respect, into the old man’s face.</i> And you have never known regret?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gravely.</i> I have known perfect joy.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>To yield what is most dear to another is very hard. Oh, Rames, I am so young, the choice is difficult. If I had some sign that Aton accepts me⁠—! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With rising passion.</i> Aton, guide my decision and grant my choice be wise!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b> is seen returning. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b> is with her. They are laughing together. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos’</b> arm is about <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b> does not see them.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>Weigh carefully. Hear every call with honesty. Aton, indeed, does call you, but it is all or nothing. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Withdraws slowly down river bank towards the Temple. Waves his hand solemnly.</i> I leave you⁠—to yourself.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Great Aton, guide me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stretches arms to the sky; looks up at stars. Then bows his head upon his hands in prayer. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b> draws near with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>My head spins, Nefertiti. Then it was in play that you dismissed me? I can hardly believe my happiness is real.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tries to embrace her.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Escaping gaily.</i> Everything’s real⁠—at the moment when⁠—you’ve got it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b> hears their voices. Turns and sees them.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>With⁠ ⁠… Sethos⁠ ⁠… ! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To her.</i> You’ve come back⁠ ⁠… !</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pretending she has just noticed him.</i> The river bank is public, I believe. All Memphis will be here presently⁠—this sacred night. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Mocking.</i> Forgive me⁠—forgive <em>us</em>⁠—if we disturbed your meditations. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Glancing at <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b>.</i> We enjoy the starlight like the other lovers!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Together!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>A young girl does not come out unattended. I am proud that Nefertiti accepts my protection⁠—as before.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Little Child!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b>, laughing.</i> Menophis, you know, is half a priest already. He has put aside all common things⁠—youth, dancing, laughter⁠—love.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Half insolently.</i> Wise Menophis! I envy a man grown old before his time. He has had some bitter disappointment probably.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Suffering keenly.</i> If you <em>really</em> love each other, I⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>Come this way, Nefertiti. I hear a pipe. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Melody on pipe heard faintly.</i> Let’s go and dance. This atmosphere is too holy. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Tries to draw her away.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pain.</i> Can this be a sign from Aton⁠—that you are worthless?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stung.</i> We’ll dance, yes, as we did at Memphis when the harvest ripened. And then we’ll bathe together, Sethos. It all is worship, and my blood this sacred night is burning⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Wild.</i> And tomorrow I may see your father⁠—?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b> whispers in his ear. They laugh. He tries again to kiss her. She escapes again, and dances seductively, taking care to go close past <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b>, who makes several half movements towards her, but controls himself.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Singing mischievously to the tune of the distant pipe, and holding <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b> by the hand. As she goes past <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b> she holds out her free hand to him temptingly.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>“Come, dance together. Take my hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Beside the rising river;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll dance upon the starlit sand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And then through life⁠—forever!”</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Catching at her hand as she flits past.</i> Nefertiti!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="3" epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Escaping his touch. Still hand in hand with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b>.</i> I heard a dead voice calling from a Tomb. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b>.</i> It’s not for us. <em>We</em> are alive!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sings as before, glancing mockingly at <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b>, who again would seize her as she goes by.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>“The rising river takes our feet,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And life flows full of laughter;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>Come, dance with me while youth is sweet⁠—”</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Touching her.</i> Little Child!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Slowing down. Sings last line lingeringly.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:verse">
								<p>
									<span>“The wedding follows after!”</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><em>My</em> Little Child.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Trying to draw her away.</i> Come, Nefertiti. Come with me, lest the Temple snatch you, too.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Listen! The waters wait the sign! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Warningly.</i> A few brief moments and the Tear of Isis falls⁠—and the choice is made, not for this life only, but forever. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Solemnly to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b>.</i> You would bind your soul to his⁠ ⁠… for all future lives⁠ ⁠… forever?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Drawing back.</i> “Forever”! “For all future lives”! For an hour⁠—a few hours, perhaps⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>You swore to me that you⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>I danced and played and sang with you. You dance lightly and your voice is sweet. But⁠—if it is true that vows taken tonight can bind me to your soul forever⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>It is true.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>… the journey would tire me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td>Nefertiti!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Steps between them. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b> hesitates.</i> Let her alone. Since her eyes first opened to the sun she has been mine. A hundred future lives shall take our feet together. And she knows it. She plays with you⁠—this singing, dancing. She <em>lives</em> with me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Seizes her, all else forgotten.</i> Leave us together, Sethos. Go!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>I played with you. You know it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b>.</i> You had forgotten our appointment! I did it⁠—for my love’s sake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b> shrinks from his sudden violence, startled, but keeps her hand.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>She has finished with you. Go!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sneers.</i> Finished! You are mistaken, Menophis. Only a while ago she said my love was precious to her⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Realising.</i> You <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">to her</i> have strange ideas of play. You’re a⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Threateningly.</i> Enough, Sethos. You knew, at least, that we belonged to one another. You have yourself to blame.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Proud of him.</i> Of course. Sethos says the same sweet things to many another maiden too.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Bitterly.</i> The Gods have set me free of you, and I am glad. When next we meet, Menophis, you shall hear the soft promises she made me <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">turns his back to go</i>, and how she spoke of <em>you</em>! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Moves faster, as <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b> advances threateningly.</i> She called you half woman and half monk⁠—no man at all <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">runs</i>, fit⁠ ⁠… only⁠ ⁠… for⁠ ⁠… the Temples!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A last shot at him.</i> Yet if I raised my little finger you’d come tumbling back⁠—a helpless slave! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</b>.</i> I am ashamed. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Demurely.</i> I did pretend he pleased me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Little Child.⁠ ⁠…</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Happy.</i> I was a little jealous of⁠—of⁠—your Aton.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>And I, perhaps, of your⁠ ⁠… Sethos.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">They smile and embrace. The pipe is heard. She breaks away and dances before him happily.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">sings</i></td>
						<td>
							<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
								<p>
									<span>“Come, dance with me, and take my hand</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">Beside the rising river;</span>
									<br/>
									<span>We’ll dance upon the starlit sand,</span>
									<br/>
									<span class="i1">And then through life⁠—forever.”</span>
								</p>
							</blockquote>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>You are a daughter of the sun!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>Isis and Aton both are in our blood!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Your beauty blinds me. I hear no other voice than your dear singing. I see no stars, your twinkling feet are everywhere.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Triumphantly.</i> It is the call of Life.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A sound is heard, like wind in an Eolian harp, faint.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Startled.</i> Listen! The moment comes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With the sound is mingled the lapping of water.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Awed.</i> It is here.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A star falls from the sky.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Both together</td>
						<td>The Tear of Isis!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Our river takes it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>The waters rise.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Our choice is made⁠—forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td>My beloved. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Embrace.</i> Mine⁠ ⁠… forever and ever⁠ ⁠… all our future lives.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>The Temple was a dream. Your beauty makes me see it. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Breaks off as he sees <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b> approaching through the palms.</i> Rames comes. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Makes to hide.</i> Great One of Visions!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Triumphantly.</i> And Sethos with him. Let them see us both. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Catches his arm.</i> Do not hide, but tell them boldly of your glorious choice.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b> have been talking together. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Sethos</b> now turns and goes off towards the Temple, walking slowly with bowed head, but looking back over his shoulder sometimes. Disappears. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</b> comes slowly forward. Holds up his hands to bless them.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Smiling gravely.</i> May Aton bless you both⁠—now⁠—and in all lives to come.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Confidently.</i> Aton <em>has</em> blessed us⁠—both.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Dazed, troubled.</i> Rames⁠—you come to know my choice. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Very gravely.</i> The Tear has fallen. The river is rising, and I⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">lowers head</i> I have heard the call.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>The choice is yours⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">solemnly</i> and <em>hers</em>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis.</td>
						<td>I have⁠ ⁠…</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti.</td>
						<td>He has⁠ ⁠…</td>
					</tr>
					<tr class="together">
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis, Nefertiti.</td>
						<td>… chosen. The rising waters and the risen stars bear witness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>They⁠ ⁠… bear⁠ ⁠… witness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Half sadly to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</b>.</i> I have weighed both voices. Another⁠—a worthier than I⁠—must replace me in the Temple.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>Aton does not compel. The call will come to you again⁠—in following lives, until⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Interrupting.</i> Our love comes from Aton. He has given Menophis to me for my own.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>All gifts are his.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td>Holy Rames, I cannot let her go from me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Solemnly.</i> The choice is made. The future lives will bring again, and yet again <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">turning to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</b></i>, this same deep opportunity, when you⁠—again⁠—shall lead his soul higher, or <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">with emphasis</i> delay and hinder by vain selfish love.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Defiant, yet frightened.</i> He is mine⁠—forever. No priest or god shall rob me of him. I keep him for myself. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Clutches him.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Rames</td>
						<td>The rising water bears witness to your vow. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With prophetic and intense gravity.</i> Where the Temple gleams white in the sunlight, and where the palaces run down to the sea, you shall hear the waters in your soul⁠—<em>and⁠—shall⁠—remember</em>.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Nefertiti</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarmed.</i> Listen! He prophesies!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Menophis</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Awed.</i> Great One of Visions!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Curtain.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
