<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Act II: Their Second Life Together</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction z3998:drama">
		<section id="act-2" epub:type="chapter z3998:scene">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h2>
						<span epub:type="label">Act</span>
						<span epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">II</span>
					</h2>
					<p epub:type="title">Their Second Life Together</p>
				</hgroup>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Time⁠—325 <abbr epub:type="se:era">BC</abbr>, Greece</p>
			</header>
			<div epub:type="z3998:dramatis-personae">
				<header>
					<p>Characters</p>
				</header>
				<ul>
					<li>
						<p>Phocion (40), Athenian General.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Lydia (35), his wife.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Lysander, a youth, Phocion’s brother.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Alexander the Great.</p>
					</li>
					<li>
						<p>Athenian Citizens.</p>
					</li>
				</ul>
			</div>
			<p>Scene⁠—Room in <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion’s</b> house in Athens. Simple. Altar to Zeus with brazier burning. Colonnade with pillars and view towards Acropolis.</p>
			<p>Late evening.</p>
			<table>
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b> is half-kneeling, half-leaning over the marble balustrade, gazing into the distance. Enter <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b>. He comes near and touches her.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>How you startled me!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Were your thoughts so far away, Little Child?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I was thinking.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>And gazing across the sea as usual. What is there so attractive beyond that dim horizon? The future or⁠—?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Perhaps its dimness only. That’s southwards, is it not? There Egypt lies, and⁠—Alexandria⁠—you said⁠—the great, new city.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Searchingly.</i> Distance still haunts your eyes. Little wonder that I startled you. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Kisses her.</i> But do not speak of Alexander’s city. Our thoughts lie nearer home⁠—in Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Where have you been, Phocion? All day I’ve missed you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>On the hills⁠—alone. I have been thinking.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Thinking⁠—you too!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>I came home by way of Theseus’ Temple, saying a prayer for our loved city and for ourselves.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>But you are weary, and your feet are splashed with mud.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>I crossed the Ilissus to be sooner home, and found it rising⁠—in flood almost. Yesterday’s rains on Mount Hymettus⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">breaks off as she makes a sudden gesture</i>. Why, what ails you, Lydia? Do I startle you a second time?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Forgive me, Phocion; do not notice my little weaknesses. It was merely⁠—there, I’ve often told you⁠—a rising river is an omen that causes me strange uneasiness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Little Child, I understand. I know your feelings. Athens herself is on edge these days⁠—and little wonder.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Phocion, let me tell you honestly⁠—I am afraid.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Anxious, perhaps, but not afraid. The mood of our beloved city takes you with it, as it takes us all. We all are patriots today. But the wife of Phocion has proved herself no coward.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Low voice.</i> Alexander is so powerful. Some say the Macedonian is a God.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Pshaw! In his own land, perhaps. But Athens has her own Gods. He is a conqueror, yes; but a conqueror can only take a city, not the souls who dwell in it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Softly.</i> Phocion, when I hear your words my fear melts away. Yet Athens <em>is</em> conquered. Our city trembles⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Hush, Lydia. I do not like to hear you say such things.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Who can stand against him, then? Who is there can oppose this conqueror of the Persians?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Every Athenian⁠—every Greek who loves our city more than he fears the Macedonian.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>All Athens, then!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>All the best in Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b> looks nervously over her shoulder towards the city and Acropolis. The dusk deepens. The first star shows.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Shudders.</i> Your speech is often mysterious like this now⁠—dark with meaning. Each night as twilight gathers from the sea about our city, there are footsteps on the causeway that make me tremble. No sooner has Hymettus darkened than shadows move silently over the courtyard and between the pillars. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns and flings her arms about him.</i> Oh, my Phocion, it is for you, not for myself, I am afraid.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Calm yourself, beloved. I am an Athenian who obeys his unconquerable Gods. I do no more than accept the destiny they lay upon him who loves his country⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>But if Alexander discovered you⁠—if⁠—!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Discovered me! What thought is this?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>If he discovered you were true to Athens, I was about to say. If he took you from me! Oh, Phocion! In dreams I have seen you lying dead at his feet⁠—lost to me forever.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Not lost, most loving woman. If the Gods take me⁠—if I die for Athens⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Am I, then, less than Athens?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Athens is great because of women like you, Lydia. You would not see her less?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>How less?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Less free. Liberty is the breath of life.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>What is my liberty if I lose you? Your voice, your touch, your living presence here beside me <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">embraces him</i>⁠—I want you alive and loving⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Our love has grown with Athens. On the green Cephissian banks we first discovered it, and that evening on Hymettus when the honey⁠—ah, I see it in your eyes, dear heart⁠—you remember even as I remember. If Athens live⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>But if <em>you</em> die! If Alexander crush you, kill you! Oh, my Phocion, this struggle against the conqueror is vain. You tempt the Gods. I fear for you and for your hopeless schemes⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>My schemes! Lydia, what do you know?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I suspect only. I feel you planning dangerous things that must take you from me. Those silent footsteps on our causeway in the dusk, the shadows that pass between the pillars, the rising waters⁠—Phocion! your strange deep love of Athens takes no account of me, your little, suffering wife.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>The love of Athens is <em>ours</em>. It is the love of country that the Gods call sacred. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks out across the fading city.</i> Hellas, your valleys and mountains, streams and happy groves⁠ ⁠… beautiful, beloved⁠ ⁠… who would not die for you⁠ ⁠… !</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I love <em>you</em>. If you live for me, you live for Hellas even more. Athens lives in our hearts, not otherwise.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sternly.</i> If a barbarian rule our dear city, our hearts are dead. It is better for my heart to mingle with the soil of Hellas than beat as the slave of Alexander.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I love you too much to see you run on death. Your wild plot to save our city is but the Fates’ way of taking you away from me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Try, Lydia, to love me as I love Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>You ask too much of me. I love Hellas, but I love you more.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Then⁠—not enough. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks away.</i> You make it hard for me. I see the right so clearly, but your clinging love makes me weak.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>There is nothing in the world for a woman but her love. If you were lost to me, Phocion, these lips could kiss one other only⁠—the rising flood <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">shudders</i> of our little Athenian river⁠—or the sea.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>What comes, sweet wife, comes to both of us together. You are overwrought with sleeplessness and watching. Trust me and love me⁠—more I cannot tell you now. Your love shall give me strength. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He embraces her and moves slowly off towards the colonnade.</i> And if there is a greater love than yours, someday we shall find it⁠—know it both together. What comes to me to do now⁠—I must do.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Goes slowly off.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="3" epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">At him.</i> A greater love! Ah, Phocion⁠—you’re going from me⁠—going towards death. I know not what you mean. There is no greater love. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Watches him disappear.</i> Then I must save you, since you will not save yourself. I cannot lose you. My love, I cannot let you⁠—<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Covers her face with her hands.</i> My love shall save you from yourself. If I do wrong the Gods forgive⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Knocking is heard. She starts and looks round. A <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b> is seen in the courtyard.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Cautiously.</i> You would see⁠—whom?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td>The wife of Phocion.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Frightened.</i> Hush! Come softly, I am she. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b> enters stealthily.</i> You bring a message for me? You bring a token?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With respect.</i> She who sends me bids me say as token this: From one who loves her Lord more than his earthly glory⁠—to her who loves as greatly.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Faintly.</i> To her who loves as greatly. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Hesitates, shows agitation, a distraught expression on her face.</i> It is to save him that I do it⁠—to save his life for⁠—both of us. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>.</i> Your great mistress bid you bring an answer back to her?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td>Without delay⁠—my orders are.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Have you no more to say? No further message? Do you bring only the token that you come from her?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td>She bid me say that you should feel perfect confidence.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>The word of Alexander⁠—?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td>Has been given, and cannot change.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Though it concern the life of one who was his enemy?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td>The Queen bid me assure you. He has given her his promise. It will not alter.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Whispers.</i> Then take this message back to her who sent you: To one who comes hither tonight when the moon is high enough to cast a shadow I will reveal what I have promised to reveal. In return I claim the boon the conqueror has sworn⁠—through her⁠—to give me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</td>
						<td>Her word and his are both securely given. I take back yours.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Go swiftly, silently. I shall await fulfilment here⁠—when the moon is high enough to cast a shadow on the marble causeway. Behind that pillar I shall wait. Go swiftly!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Messenger</b>. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b>, looking anxiously at the sky, withdraws into the shadow of the pillars. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> enters, his arm upon the shoulder of <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b>, his youthful brother. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b> overhears their talk.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With enthusiasm.</i> Our last meeting now, and then to action. Oh, Phocion, I feel the Gods are with us. Your daring shall save Athens, and Hellas will live⁠—even if we die.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>We all stand or fall together. They are picked men, and heroes; no one among them thinks of self. The risk, of course, is great, but it is nothing when the stake is considered.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Everything favours us. The best troops of Alexander’s army are still in Egypt. The entire city is behind us. All Athens will rise when it sees you are our leader. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Vehemently.</i> We shall drive the proud Macedonian out. Oh, I’m glad the talk is over soon! I burn for action.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>I, too, want action. I am not made for stealth and for conspiracy. Plotting and hesitation weary me. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sighs.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Phocion, you feel no doubt, though⁠—? I heard you sigh. Are you less sure of⁠—of anything?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>For myself, boy, I have no doubt. For Athens I am sure and strong. Did I sigh perhaps? If so⁠—if so, it was for others whose lives I hold in trust. For others⁠—the truest, best, and bravest men in all Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>The Gods will bear that burden for you, Phocion.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Yes, yes; the Gods will bear it⁠—partly.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>No one can lead but you. We are of one accord.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>I <em>will</em> lead, Lysander. Have no fear. Of myself I do not think. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks out.</i> The moon is up. I see the evening star o’er Salamis. They will be here very shortly.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>We are quite safe here. I took the password round myself at noon.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>We cannot be too cautious. Alexander’s spies are more numerous than the bees upon Hymettus. They can sting as sharply too.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Oh, our secret is well guarded. Yet the least whisper or thoughtless word could so easily betray us. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looks round with a moment’s hesitation, then continues in a lower voice.</i> I only would⁠—that Lydia⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Lydia!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>She is in great favour with Alexander’s queen, Statira.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>So much the better! Since she knows nothing there is nothing she can reveal. Alexander seeks to play the generous conqueror. That the wife of Phocion accepts favours that Phocion spurns can only save us from suspicion. The Persian woman helps us without knowing it. And so does Lydia!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>You are right, Phocion. The Gods show their will in little things like this. We are under their protection. Yet if word reached Alexander of our gathering in your house tonight⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Keep your words for later, boy; you waste your strength. How can you hold such idle thoughts? Hellas a Macedonian province! Her ancient liberties crushed! Our last hope dead as soon as born, and no blow struck!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Phocion, forgive me! And, Selene, in yonder rising moon, forgive me too. The Gods protect and help us!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="3" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Pallas Athena, give us wisdom to plan and strength to strike.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b> comes forward from her hiding-place among the columns. The moonlight falls on her. As she moves she notices that it casts a shadow. She hurries. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> watches her somewhat closely.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>Ah, Lydia.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><em>You</em> did not call me, Phocion? It seemed⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Smiling.</i> Your maidens called you to the bath. It is your bathing hour.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b>.</i> Lysander, good evening! You are fortunate. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Half laughing, half jealous.</i> Phocion has more time for his brother than for his wife.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Had I a wife as brave and faithful as my brother has, I should be more fortunate still! These are grave times, good Lydia, for true Athenian men.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Ah, Lydia knows too well, Lysander. But do not detain her now. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b>.</i> I will come later for you, Little Child⁠—an hour at the most.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I am always ready for you, Phocion, and always true. I, too, am an Athenian.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>The Gods watch over you!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="3" epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>And over you!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> moves to the balustrade and leans over, watching the night. He waits for her to go. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b> turns to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> and speaks low and hurriedly.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>You love him, I know, Lysander, and he loves you.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Before he even knew your name, I loved Phocion, <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">sternly</i> and more than Phocion I love Phocion’s honour.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>And so loving him you would urge him⁠—to his death. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With passion.</i> You shall not, Lysander; Phocion is mine and he belongs to me. I will hold him fast to this life. A glorious career now lies at Phocion’s feet.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>I love Phocion’s honour too well to tempt him to dishonour.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Tush, boy! You do not understand. I would not tempt him. Fate does not tempt, it commands. The high Gods bid us to accept fate bravely. The weak resist it; the strong accept and make it glorious. And a glorious career now lies at Phocion’s feet.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>You speak with knowledge, Lydia? If so, how come you by such knowledge?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Hush, not so loud. Lysander, you faithful brother, I tell you it is common knowledge. The Military Governorship of Alexandria⁠—once offered to Phocion already and refused by him⁠—is open to him still. Alexander knows his worth⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>His incorruptibility too. But how know <em>you</em> this, Lydia?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I only know that Alexander is generous and will raise him to even greater honour. He places Phocion above all men in Athens⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Coldly.</i> Has Alexander’s queen informed you thus. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Louder.</i> It seems strange to me, Lydia, that the wife of⁠—an Athenian patriot⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>How loud your voices grow. Lydia, Little Child, you had best leave us now, for Lysander and I have grave business to transact together⁠—and we expect others too.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">There is a low knocking at the door.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Lysander chides me that I accept kindness from the queen of Athens’ conqueror.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>I see no harm in that, and possibly much good. Your love will ever guide you. Farewell, now, for a little while. And happiness go with you!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I leave you. It is your friends who come to you at twilight now so often. The Fates protect you, my Phocion! <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Whispers to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> as she goes.</i> Oh, save him, Lysander! Save him from himself⁠—for me, his wife!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Exit slowly, looking back fondly at <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> as she goes. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> watches her with an expression that betrays doubt, anxiety and disapproval. He shakes his head. The knocking is repeated. It is a definite knock that has been prearranged.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Open, Lysander. It is the Citizens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A dozen <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b> enter quietly. Their leader holds a scroll in his hand. In turn they greet <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> with obvious respect, each giving the password, while <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> replies with the countersign:</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</td>
						<td>The Gods deliver Athens!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="3" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>They will deliver her!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">When all are in, they group themselves. An elderly <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</b>, holding the scroll, acts as spokesman.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>It is safest our meeting should be brief, and no words wasted.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
						<td>We stand for action.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Citizen</td>
						<td>Immediate action.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Third Citizen</td>
						<td>Each day that passes consolidates the barbarian power that would ruin Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Citizens, we need two conditions for success⁠—to strike hard, and to surprise.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>We must move warily. The Macedonian’s spies hide everywhere, and money has been flowing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>There are ten thousand hearts in Athens above gold⁠—!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Gravely.</i> Our preparations must be sure. You bring tonight the list of patriots?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
						<td>It is drawn up <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">holds out scroll</i>. Twenty names stand written here, each signed by his own hand, each guaranteeing three hundred men of arms⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Whom we can trust?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
						<td>The names are guarantee, as you will see⁠—the best in Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Second Citizen</td>
						<td>Ready to live or die as our beloved city lives⁠—or dies.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>And thousands more will follow once we show the way.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Our forlorn hope <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">takes the scroll</i> is favoured of the Gods, and will be led by them.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Begins to read names.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</td>
						<td>Upon great leadership hangs success or failure. There can be one leader only.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</td>
						<td>Phocion! Phocion!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="3" epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Phocion is our leader.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> reads silently. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> suddenly turns his head towards the moonlit courtyard.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Low.</i> I saw a figure pass.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</td>
						<td>A few moments ago I saw one too⁠—between the pillars.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Another Citizen</td>
						<td>Are we alone here?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Looking up.</i> My wife⁠—and her maidens⁠—are about. We are alone.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
						<td>Once read, Phocion, the list must be instantly destroyed. Each signature is a warrant for the writer’s death.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Nervously.</i> I counsel haste. The very stones move as with footsteps. The sky has eyes.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Turns towards a burning brazier close behind him.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Calmly.</i> I have read. The names are⁠—what Athens would expect.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td>Then let me burn it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Rising.</i> Phocion, in the names you read, and in the names of all assembled here, we offer you the leadership⁠—the military leadership. We ask you to lead our beloved city back to liberty again. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Muffled applause.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">While <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> has been reading, a woman’s figure is seen creeping from pillar to pillar where the shadows are deepest. She is followed closely by a second figure⁠—a man swathed in a headdress such as that worn by the Persian warrior in the Elgin Marbles. Unnoticed in the dimness they reach the colonnades where they can hear all that passes.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Slowly.</i> Citizens, in the name of Athens, and with the approval of the deathless Gods of Athens⁠—I accept the leadership.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">He hands the scroll to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b>, who has stepped forward eagerly to seize it. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> turns towards the fire.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">First Citizen</td>
						<td>Then we are halfway to success already. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Applause.</i> The sooner we disband, the better. Three of us may stay with Phocion to decide the final⁠—</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">At this moment the cloaked figure steps out into the centre of the courtyard. He is plainly visible in the moonlight. Consternation reigns. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> reaches for his sword. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> fumbles over the brazier, thrusting the scroll into the flames. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b> stand firm, not trying to hide, but visibly startled.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</td>
						<td>We are betrayed!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</td>
						<td>A spy! We have been overheard!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</td>
						<td>A Persian!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Self-possessed.</i> No stranger is unwelcome in my house, even though he enter⁠—without permission. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Louder to stranger.</i> You would see Phocion? I am he.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b> remains hidden in the shadows.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Advancing.</i> I ask forgiveness for my unannounced intrusion. I disturb you. But my need is urgent. This is my warrant: I am a messenger from Alexander.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Stands erect and waits.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Others</td>
						<td>From Alexander!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Calmly.</i> You bring Phocion a message from Alexander?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</td>
						<td>Of first importance.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>You may deliver it.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> pauses to listen too.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</td>
						<td>A gift I am bid offer first⁠—a gift from Egypt, where Phocion fought so bravely and so well. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Holds out an object of gold.</i> From the Temple of Ammon himself in Libia.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Coldly.</i> Phocion fights not for gifts; nor can he accept anything from the barbarian conqueror of Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</td>
						<td>I am bid to urge reflection on you. First words are not the truest always, nor the wisest. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Pauses.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Simply, with scorn.</i> I am an Athenian.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Lays gift on a marble table beside <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b>.</i> Alexander commands me say further⁠—that, with this gift, he would honour Phocion by yet another one. He bids me call you the Military Governor of his new city in Egypt.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>The two gifts are one. I have one answer only.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Smoothly.</i> Then, with your answer, I ask permission to take back some trifle⁠—such as that parchment the youth there would destroy⁠—as proof to Alexander that the House of Phocion is loyal.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b>, startled, desists a moment. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> takes a sudden step forwards.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Alarmed.</i> Loyal⁠—!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Stranger</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Throws off disguise.</i> The parchment.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Voice of command. Holds hand out.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td>Alexander!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">All recognise <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</b>. Confusion, consternation, and murmurs: “Alexander!” “Alexander!”</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="5" epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</td>
						<td>Hand it to me, boy, before another name is burned. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Laughs.</i></td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</b> strides towards him. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> defies him. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</b> seizes him.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td><em>He</em> shall be surety, Phocion, for your loyalty.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b>, holding his sword, rushes on <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</b> to aid <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b>, and above all to rescue the scroll. The <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b> stand their ground and are about to interfere, when <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b> rushes in and throws herself on <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b>, checking his violent attack. At the same moment <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</b> stamps on the marble floor. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soldiers</b> enter. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</b> stand facing one another in silence for a moment.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>I hold you the bravest man in Athens, Phocion, and such men as you I need. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Holds out the scroll, as yet unread.</i> But lesser men than you I do not⁠—need!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>Phocion! Great Alexander!⁠ ⁠… Statira promised me.⁠ ⁠… Oh, he is too brave to die⁠ ⁠… !</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">To <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soldiers</b>.</i> Three of you take the boy away. The rest withdraw. No, let these greybeards go.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">A few <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizens</b> creep out, following <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</b> and <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Soldiers</b>.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lysander</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Calling back to <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b>.</i> The Gods will not desert us⁠ ⁠… !</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">With dignity.</i> You are the conqueror of Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</td>
						<td>Lesser men than you I do not need. Give me your allegiance <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">pointing significantly to the scroll</i> and I give you⁠—these lives!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Whispering.</i> Phocion, you cannot sacrifice such men!</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Citizen</td>
						<td>Do not think of us! What is life to the conquered? Gladly would we die for Athens.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</td>
						<td>I wait your decision, Phocion.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Bitterly.</i> Phocion, Military Governor of Alexandria, is Alexander’s host.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</td>
						<td>The word of Phocion is enough. <i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Burns the scroll unread.</i> Lysander, the boy, shall be Captain of your Bodyguard in Egypt. The Gods⁠—your Gods⁠—are witness to what I say.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction"><b epub:type="z3998:persona">Alexander</b> salutes <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> and goes out. <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</b> is alone with <b epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</b>. There is a moment’s silence.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Brokenly.</i> Athens! I have failed you! My life is broken in pieces.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Hides face in hands.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>But I meant to save you, Phocion. My love would save you. Have I done wrong? Oh, tell me.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Low.</i> You have done⁠—your⁠—best. No one⁠—no woman⁠—can do more.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I could not face life without you. I could not see you die. My love made the desperate plan. I bargained with Alexander’s queen⁠—life with honour and glory for you in Egypt, the land you love. Oh, Phocion, beloved, do not judge me hardly. You do not speak.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td rowspan="2" epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Patiently.</i> There is something here I cannot understand.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">His hand touches the gift from Egypt. He looks at it curiously, then looks out away from her.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Lydia</td>
						<td>I love you too much. Is that hard to understand?</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td epub:type="z3998:persona">Phocion</td>
						<td><i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Sadly.</i> Yet the love the Gods bring is otherwise⁠ ⁠… I think.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<td/>
						<td>
							<i epub:type="z3998:stage-direction">Curtain.</i>
						</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
